section nine CIA counterintelligence a
counterintelligence an introduction one
definition of Counter Intelligence
counterintelligence CI is a special form
of intelligence activity separate and
distinct from other disciplines its
purpose is to discover hostile foreign
intelligence operations and destroy
their effectiveness this objective
involves the protection of the United
States government against infiltration
by foreign agents as well as the control
and manipulation of adversary
intelligence operations an effort is
made to both discern and deceive the
plans and intentions of enemy
intelligence services defined more
formally counterintelligence is an
intelligence activity dedicated to
undermining the effectiveness of hostile
intelligence services its purpose is to
guard the nation against espionage other
modern forms of spying and sabotage
directed against the United States its
citizens information and installations
at home and abroad by infiltrating
groups engaged in these practices and by
gathering storing and analyzing
information on in Emeco clandestine
activity footnote counterintelligence
may also be thought of as the knowledge
needed for the protection and
preservation of the military economic
and productive strength of the United
States including the security of the
government and domestic and foreign
affairs against or from espionage
sabotage and all other similar
clandestine activities designed to
weaken or destroy the United States
report of the Commission on government
security Washington DC 1957 pages 48 and
49 and footnote in short
counterintelligence specialists waged
nothing less than a secret war against
antagonistic intelligence services in
the absence of an effective US
counterintelligence program notes a
counterintelligence specialist
adversaries of democracy function in
what is largely a benign in
to the threat the adversaries of
democracy are numerous and widespread in
the United States alone 1079 Soviet
officials were on permanent assignment
in February 1975 according to FBI
figures among these over 40% have been
positively identified as members of the
KGB or GRU the Soviet civilian and
military intelligence unit's
conservative estimates for the number of
unidentified intelligence officers
raised the figures to over 60% of the
Soviet representation some defector
sources have estimated that 70% to 80%
of Soviet officials have some
intelligence connection furthermore the
number of Soviets in the United States
has tripled since 1960 and is still
increasing the opening of American
deepwater ports to Russian ships in 1972
has given Soviet intelligence services
virtually complete Geographic access to
the United States observes a
counterintelligence specialist in 1974
for example over 200 Soviet ships with a
total crew complement of 13,000 officers
and men called at 40 deepwater ports in
this country various exchange groups
provide additional opportunities for
Soviet intelligence gathering within the
United States some 4,000 Soviets entered
the United States as commercial or
exchange visitors in 1974 during the
past decade the FBI identified over 100
intelligence officers among the
approximately 400 Soviet students who
attended American universities during
this period as part of an east-west
student exchange program also in the
14-year history of this program more
than 100 American students were the
target of Soviet recruitment approaches
in the USSR other areas of
counterintelligence concern include the
sharp increase in the number of Soviet
immigrants to the United States less
than 500 in 1972 compared to 4,000
1874 the rise in east-west commercial
exchange visitors from 641 in 1972 to
1500 in 1974 and the growing number of
Soviet bloc officials in this country
from 416 in 1960 to 798 in 1975 foreign
intelligence agents have attempted to
recruit not only executive branch
personnel but also congressional staff
members the FBI has advised the
committee that there have been instances
in the past where hostile foreign
intelligence officers have used the
opportunity presented by overt contacts
to attempt to recruit members of
congressional staffs who might have
access to secret information the most
serious threat is from illegal agents
who have no easily detectable contacts
with their intelligence service the
problem of illegals is summarized by the
FBI as follows quote the illegal is a
highly trained specialist in espionage
tradecraft he may be a foreign national
and/or a professional intelligence
officer dispatched to the United States
under a false identity some illegals may
be trained in the scientific and
technical field to permit easy access to
sensitive areas of employment the
detection of illegals presents a most
serious problem to the FBI once they
enter the United States with either
fraudulent or true documentation their
presence is obscured among the thousands
of legitimate emigrate entering the
United States annually relatively
undetected they are able to maintain
contact with the foreign control by
means of secret writing microdots and
open signals and conventional
communications which are not susceptible
to discovery through conventional
investigative measures end quote in
several instances the FBI accomplished
this most difficult assignment by
carefully designed and limited mail
opening programs which if they had been
authorized by a judicial warrant might
have been entirely proper it is most
unfortunate that the FBI did not choose
to seek lawful authorization
for such methods this brief summary of
the threat facing the American
counterintelligence Corps in this
country is troubling enough yet it does
not take into account the worldwide
scope of the problem as an FBI
counterintelligence expert states
hostile foreign intelligence services
quote are alert for operational
opportunities against the United States
whether they occur within this country
abroad in other countries or in the home
country itself an operation might begin
in the home country with recruitment of
an American visitor transfer to the
United States with his return and again
even later might be transferred to a
third country where the American agent
may be met outside the normal reach of
the United States counterintelligence
coverage regardless of the geographical
location the operation is still directed
against the United States and can cause
just as much damage from abroad as
within our own borders
end quote the espionage activities of
the Soviet Union and other communist
nations directed against the United
States are extensive and relentless to
combat this threat American
counterintelligence officers have
developed various sophisticated
investigative techniques to one obtain
information about foreign intelligence
services to protect our intelligence
service and three control the outcome of
this subterranean struggle for
intelligence supremacy the task is
difficult technically and raises
sensitive legal and ethical questions as
the CIA deputy director for operations
has testified the quote u.s.
counterintelligence program to be both
effective and in line with traditional
American freedoms must steer a middle
course between blanket illegal frivolous
and unsubstantiated inquiries into the
private lives of US citizens and
excessive restrictions which will render
the government's counterintelligence
arms impotent to protect the nation from
foreign penetration and covert
manipulation end quote
three CI as product information about
the enemy counterintelligence is both
activity and his product the product is
reliable information about all the
hostile foreign intelligence services
who attack the United States by stealth
to guard against hostile intelligence
operations aimed at this nation a vast
amount of information is required it is
necessary to know the organizational
structure of the enemy service the key
personnel the methods of recruitment and
training and these specific operations
this information must be gathered within
the United States and in all the foreign
areas to which US interests extend
within the intelligence service this
acquisitive activity is referred to as
intelligence collection the resulting
product pertinent information on the
enemy intelligence service is often
called raw intelligence data the efforts
of intelligence services through the
world to conceal such information from
one another through various security
devices and elaborate deceptions creates
for the counterintelligence specialists
what James angleton former chief of CIA
counterintelligence calls a kind of
wilderness of mirrors for CI as activity
security and counter espionage as an
activity CI consists of two matching
halves security and counter espionage
security is the passive or defensive
side of counterintelligence it consists
basically of establishing static
defenses against all hostile and
concealed acts regardless of who carries
them out counter espionage C II is the
offensive or aggressive side of
counterintelligence it involves the
identification of a specific adversary
and a knowledge of the specific
operation he is conducting counter
espionage personnel must then attempt to
counter these operations by infiltrating
the hostile service called penetration
and through various forms of
manipulation ideally the thrust of the
hostile operation is turned back against
the enemy the security side of
counterintelligence includes the
screening and clearance of personnel
and the development of programs to
safeguard sensitive intelligence
information that is the proper
administration of security controls the
intelligence services try to defend
three things one their personnel to
their installations and three their
operations at the Central Intelligence
Agency
the office of security is responsible
for the protection of personnel and
installations while actual operations
are largely the preserve of the CI staff
and the operating divisions among the
defensive devices used for information
control by intelligence agencies
throughout the world our security
clearances polygraphs locking containers
security education document
accountability censorship camouflage and
codes devices for physical security
include fences lighting general systems
alarms badges and passes and watchdogs
area control relies on curfews
checkpoints restricted areas and border
frontier control thus the security side
of counterintelligence is all that
concerns perimeter defense badges
knowing everything you have to know
about your own people the
counterespionage side involves knowing
all about intelligence services foreign
intelligence services their people their
installations their methods and their
operations so that you have a completely
different level of interest however the
office of security and the CI staff
exchange information to assure adequate
security systems five the penetration
and the double agent several kinds of
operations exist within the rubric of
counter espionage one however transcends
all the others in importance the
penetration a primary goal of
counterintelligence is to contain the
intelligence service of the enemy to do
so it is eminently desirable to know his
plans in advance and in detail this
admirable but difficult objective may be
achieved through a high-level
infiltration of the opposition service
as a director of the CIA has written
experience has shown penetration to be
the most effective response to Soviet
and Bloc intelligence services moreover
a well-placed infiltrator in a hostile
intelligence service may be better able
than anyone else to determine whether
one's own service has been penetrated a
former director of the Defense
Intelligence Agency dia has observed
that the three principal programs used
by the United States to meet neutralize
and defeat hostile intelligence
penetrations are one our own
penetrations to security screening and
clearance of personnel and three our
efforts for safeguarding sensitive
intelligence information the importance
of the penetration is emphasized by an
experienced CIA counter espionage
operative with mixed but expressive
similes conducting counter espionage
with penetration can be like shooting
fish in a barrel
in contrast conducting counter espionage
without the act of penetration is like
fighting in the dark methods of
infiltrating the opposition service
takes several forms usually the most
effective and desirable penetration is
the recruitment of an agent in place he
is a citizen of an enemy nation and is
already in the employ of its
intelligence service ideally he will be
both highly placed and venal the
individual say a KGB officer and bond is
approached and asked to work for the
intelligence service of the United
States various inducements including
ideology may be used to recruit him
against his own service if the
recruitment is successful the operation
may be especially worthwhile since the
agent is presumably already trusted
within his organization and his access
to documents may be unquestioned Jackie
Dunlop who worked at and spied on the
National Security Agency NSA in the
1960s is a well known example of a
Soviet agent in place within the US
intelligence service his handler was a
Soviet Air Force attache at the Soviet
embassy in Washington of course a single
penetration can be
with an intelligence goldmine as work in
Philby for the Soviet Union and Colonel
Oleg Penkovsky for the United States
another method of infiltration is the
double agent double agents however are
costly and time-consuming and they are
risky human lives are at stake
double agents also normally involve pure
drudgery with few dramatic results as
new information is checked against
existing files on top of this comes the
difficulty of assuring against a
double-cross
moreover passing credible documents can
be a major problem the operations must
be made interesting to the opposition to
make fake papers plausible the genuine
article must be provided now and again
classified documents must be cleared and
this process can be painstakingly slow
also this means letting a lot of good
stuff go to the enemy without much in
return complaints a CI officer with
considerable experience to accomplish
each of these tasks hard work careful
planning and considerable manpower are
necessary the extraordinary manpower
requirements of the double agent
operation restricted the abilities of
the British to run cases during the
Second World War
approximately 150 double agents for the
entire period of the war and no more
than about 25 at any one time moreover
their mission was eased greatly by the
ability of the British to read the
German cipher throughout most of the
conflict six the defector almost as good
as the agent in place and less
troublesome than the whole range of
double agents is the defector with
knowledge here the procedure consists of
interrogation and validation of bona
fides as usual but without the worrisome
ongoing requirements for a skillful mix
of false and genuine documents and other
logistical support though an agent in
place is preferable because of the
continuing useful information he can
provide often a man does not want to
risk his life by staying in place
especially where the security is
sophistic
his preference is to defect to safety in
other words agents in place are harder
to come by in systems like the Soviet
bloc countries defection is more likely
in contrast agents in place are more
easily recruited in so-called third
world areas within the United States the
interrogation of intelligence service
defectors who have defected in the u.s.
is primarily the responsibility of the
FBI though the CIA may have a follow-up
session with the individual sometimes
the bona fides of a defector remain
disputed for many years CIA recruited
defectors abroad are occasionally
brought to the United States and
resettled the FBI is notified and after
the CIA completes its interrogation FBI
may interrogate CIA does not bring all
defectors to the United States only
those expected to make a significant
contribution CIA generally handles
resettlement not only of defectors from
abroad but also at the request of the
FBI of defectors in the United States
seven the deception the penetration or
double agent is closely related to
another important seee technique the
deception simply stated the deception is
an attempt to give the enemy a false
impression about something causing him
to take action contrary to his own
interests fooling the Germans into the
belief that d-day landings were to be in
the pas-de-calais rather than in
Normandy is a classic example of a
successful deception operation in world
war ii deception is related to
penetration because our agents operating
within foreign intelligence agencies can
serve as excellent channels through
which misleading information can flow to
the enemy so double agents serve both as
collectors of positive intelligence and
channels for deception however there are
opportunities for deception other than
our own agents in fact an infinite
variety exists according to an
experienced practitioner one example the
u.s. can allow penetration of its own
intelligence service and then feed false
information through him
eight other CI techniques other
counterespionage operations include
surreptitious surveillance of various
kinds for instance audio mail physical
and optical that is photography
interrogation
sometimes incommunicado as in the case
of one defector and provocation decoding
clandestine radio transmission and
letters with messages written in secret
ink between the visible lines is part
and parcel of the seee trade as is
trailing suspected agents observing
dead-drops the exchange of material like
documents or instructions between a spy
and his handler and photographing
individuals entering opposition
embassies or at other locations at the
recent funeral of CIA agent Richard
Welch two Eastern European diplomats
were discovered among the press corps
snapping photographs of CIA intelligence
officers attending the burial ceremony
since the focus of offensive
counterintelligence is disruption of the
enemy service provocation can be an
important element of ce2 it amounts in
essence to harassment of the opposition
such as publishing the names of his
agents or sending a defector into his
midst who is in reality a double agent
9ci as organisation security at CIA is
the responsibility of the office of
security a division of the deputy
director for administration
counterespionage policy is guided by the
counterintelligence staff of the
Operations Directorate clandestine
service besides setting policy the CI
staff sometimes conducts its own
operations though most CI operations
emanate directly from the various
geographic divisions as the CIA field
personnel through the practice of the
counterintelligence discipline attempt
to guard against enemy manipulation of
espionage and covert action operations
structurally counterintelligence
services are usually composed of two
additional sections which support
security and operations they are the
research and the liaison sections good
research is critical
to a good counterintelligence effort and
it may take several forms it can involve
the amassing of encyclopedic
intelligence on individuals including
American citizens associated wittingly
or unwittingly with hostile intelligence
services specialists say that the
hallmark of a sophisticated CI service
is its collection of accurate records CI
research personnel also produce reports
on topics of interest to the specialty
including guidelines for the
interrogation of defectors and current
analyses on such subjects as proprietary
companies used by foreign intelligence
services and the structure of Soviet
bloc intelligence services CI
researchers also analyze defector briefs
and in the case of compromised documents
help ascertain who had access and what
damage was inflicted liaison with other
counterintelligence services at home and
abroad is also vital since no effective
counterintelligence organization can do
its job alone the various CI units at
home are particularly important as
counterintelligence with all its
intricacies and deceptions requires
coordination among agencies and sharing
of records unlike the totally unified
KGB organization the American
intelligence service is fragmented and
it depends upon liaison to make
operations more effective coordination
between CIA and FBI counterintelligence
units is especially critical since in
theory at least the former has foreign
jurisdiction and the latter domestic yet
they must monitor the movements of
foreign spies and and out of these two
jurisdictions sometimes this
coordination fails dramatically in 1970
for example j edgar hoover of the FBI
terminated formal liaison with the CIA
and all the other intelligence units in
the government because of a disagreement
with the CIA on a question of source
disclosure the Thomas Rhea case liaison
with foreign intelligence services
overseas can undergo strain - as one CI
specialist has said there are no
friendly services there are services of
friendly foreign powers
each service fears the other has been
infiltrated by hostile agents and is
reluctant to see national secrets go
outside its own vaults nonetheless
cooperation does take place since all
intelligence services seek information
and with precautions we'll take it where
they can get it if it is useful the CIA
will work with friendly services to
uncover hostile intelligence operations
including illegals directed at the
government of the friendly service for
example a CIA recruited defector may
reveal Soviet agents in a friendly
foreign government this information is
shared with the friendly government if
there is proper protection of the source
protection of the CIA source is
paramount
FBI counter espionage activities within
the United States are supervised by the
counterintelligence branch of the FBI
Intelligence Division the branch is made
up of four sections three of which
direct field operations conducted by the
bureau's field offices the fourth
handles liaison with other agencies and
supervises the FBI's legal attache is
assigned to serve in the embassies in
several foreign countries the formal
structure for counter espionage
coordination between the FBI and the
military intelligence agencies was
established in 1939 and embodied most
recently in a charter for the
interdepartmental intelligence
conference in 1964 this formal body
chaired by the FBI director and
including the heads of the military
intelligence agencies has not played a
significant decision-making role in
recent years as late as 1974 some FBI
officials took the position that the
bureau's counter espionage activities
were not under the authority of the
Attorney General since the FBI was
accountable in this area directly to the
United States intelligence board and the
National Security Council a Justice
Department committee chaired by
Assistant Attorney General Henry
Peterson sharply rejected this view and
declared quote there can be no doubt
that in the area of foreign
counterintelligence as in all its other
functions
the FBI is subject to the power and
authority of the
Attorney General and quote footnote
report of the Petersons Committee on
COINTELPRO pages 34 and 35 the committee
was especially concerned that the ad hoc
equivalent of the US intelligence board
had approved the discredited Houston
plan in 1970 however the committee
complied with the FBI's request that it
exclude from its review of domestic
COINTELPRO activities
the bureau's extremely sensitive foreign
intelligence collection techniques
memorandum from FBI director Kelly -
acting Attorney General Robert Bork
December 11th 1973 and footnote in
recent years the FBI has taken steps to
upgrade its counter espionage effort
which had been neglected because of the
higher priority given to domestic
intelligence in the late 60s and early
70s new career development and
mid-career training programs have been
instituted FBI agents specializing in
counter espionage begin their careers as
criminal investigators and not as
analysts and Bureau officials stress
that their role is accurate fact-finding
rather than evaluation nevertheless
counter espionage supervisory personnel
have recently attended high-level
training courses in foreign affairs and
area studies outside the bureau here
then are the key elements of
counterintelligence together they
combine into a discipline of great
importance for the rock-bottom
obligation of an intelligence service is
to defend the country meaning this
obligation is the very raison d'etre of
counterintelligence the discipline also
represents the most secret of secret
intelligence activities the heart of the
onion it's great importance and its
ultra secrecy make counterintelligence
an area of concern that cannot be
ignored by policy makers and by those
responsible for legislative oversight as
a review of current issues in CI a--
tests the discipline has several
problems which demand the attention of
those charged with the defense of the
country and the reform of the
intelligence community
section 9 Part B current issues and
counterintelligence one two philosophies
December 1974 marked the end of an era
in CIA counterintelligence James
Angleton the chief of
counterintelligence at the Central
Intelligence Agency since 1954 retired
over differences of opinion with
director William Colby on the proper
approach to the practice of
counterintelligence the new regime
proved to be considerably different in
its approach to counterintelligence
emphasizing a diffusion of CI
responsibilities throughout the
Operations Directorate presumably this
has led to an increased flow of
counterintelligence information within
the agency but at the same time has
raised questions concerning compartment
ation and security the new chief of CIA
counterintelligence has instituted a
series of specific changes which have
been studied closely by the Select
Committee the findings are of an
extremely sensitive character and have
been reported to the Senate and to the
president in a classified form it should
be noted here that CIA
counterintelligence is now emphasizing
different factors than heretofore which
reflects a somewhat different philosophy
than that espoused by Angleton these
differences in viewpoint raised several
important questions concerning how best
to protect the United States including
the proper degree of compartment ation
of CI information methods of operation
approaches to security research
priorities extent of liaison cooperation
and emphasis on deception activities
among other things a high-level
executive branch review of the
classified issues which have surfaced in
this disagreement is of considerable
importance included in this review
should be an examination of the approval
process for certain counter espionage
operations two interagency relations
equally as troubling as these issues is
the problem of CI a CI relations with
other count
intelligence units in the government
particularly vexing have been the
on-again off-again liaison ties between
the agency and the FBI this history has
been marked by turbulence though a
strong undercurrent of cooperation has
usually existed at the staff level since
1952 when the bureau began sending a
liaison man to the CIA on a regular
basis these sources of friction between
the CIA and the FBI in the early days
revolved around such matters as the
frequent unwillingness of the bureau to
assist the CIA within the United States
or to help recruit foreign officials in
this country pressure from the CIA on
the bureau to increase microphone
coverage of foreign targets within the
United States was also a red flag to
Hoover a series of such disagreements
punctuated the relations between the two
agencies throughout the 1950s and 1960s
several flaps arose for example when the
CIA domestic Operations Division
attempted to recruit foreign officials
within the United States and failed to
advise the bureau in 1966 an informal
agreement was negotiated between the FBI
and the CIA to regularize their
coordination this agreement had as its
heart that the CIA would seek
concurrence and coordination of the FBI
before engaging in clandestine activity
in the United States and that the FBI
would concur and coordinate if the
proposed action does not conflict with
any operation current or planned
including active investigation by the
FBI moreover when an agent recruited by
the CIA abroad arrived in the United
States the FBI would be advised and the
two agencies would confer regarding the
handling of the agent in the United
States the CIA could continue its
handling of the agent for foreign
intelligence purposes and the FBI would
also become involved where there were
internal security factors although it
was recognized that CIA might continue
to handle the agent in the United States
and provide the bureau with information
bearing on internal security matters
eventually the much-heralded though
actually minor Rijo incident in 1970
became the straw that broke the camel's
back
Hoover ordered the discontinuation of
FBI liaison with the Central
Intelligence Agency
though informal means of communication
continued between CIA and FBI staff
personnel Hoover's decision was a
setback to the coordination of
counterintelligence activities in the
government
not until Hoover was gone from the
Bureau did formal liaison relations
begin to improve
today most counterintelligence officers
and both agencies say that coordination
and communication linkages are good
though a recently retired CIA CI officer
points to a vital need for closer
integration of the CI efforts of the CIA
and the FBI the most salient criticisms
of FBI counterintelligence voiced at the
CIA concern one the lack of sufficient
CI manpower in the FBI to occasional
disputes over the bona fides of
defectors and three differences of
opinion on the possibility of hostile
penetrations within the government
each of these matters also requires
immediate review by the executive branch
in particular the occasional interagency
disputes over defector bona fides and
differences of opinion on suspected
hostile penetrations crying out for a
higher level of authority in the
executive branch to settle these
sometimes divisive disagreements 3 the
scope and basis of FBI
counterintelligence in the imperfect
contemporary world where other nations
have interests which conflict with those
of the United States foreign directed
plan destined intelligence activities in
this country must be of constant concern
to the American people one of the
original reasons for the FBI's domestic
intelligence mission was that the United
States needed in the late 1930s a
coordinated program for investigating
persons engaged in espionage counter
espionage or
sabotage by mid 1939 the FBI and
military intelligence had gathered a
reservoir of information concerning
foreign agencies operating in the United
States with efficient channels for the
exchange of information there is no
question that during this pre-war period
foreign espionage constituted a serious
threat to the security of the United
States and thus supported the basic
decision to conduct investigations of
activities which were not within the
specific provisions of prevailing
statutes but which involved potential
espionage counter espionage or sabotage
footnote directive of President
Roosevelt June 26 1939 while the FBI's
responsibilities were also described at
times as extending to subversion and the
lack of outside guidance allowed for
overly broad FBI investigations the
problem of spying was always paramount
see the orders of President Roosevelt
and attorney general Biddle regarding
warrantless wiretapping discussed in
report on warrantless FBI electronic
surveillance and footnote one of the
major difficulties in any attempt to
base investigations of foreign espionage
on the criminal statutes has been from
the outset the restricted and sometimes
contradictory scope of the laws a recent
legal analysis has observed that the
legislation is in many ways
incomprehensible most notably the
Espionage statutes do not make it a
crime simply to engage in the knowing
and unauthorized transfer of classified
information to foreign agents moreover
the statutes do not extend to a range of
privately held information especially on
scientific and technical matters which
would be valuable to a foreign power
hostile foreign intelligence activities
include more than just looking for
classified information or espionage
recruits information of a highly
technical and strategic nature though
unclassified which is normally
restricted or unavailable in other
societies is openly procurable
in the United States through academic
institutions trade associations and
government offices intelligence officers
may seek out persons who have defected
to the United States to induce them to
read affect back to their home country
foreign intelligence targets in this
country may include information
possessed by third nations and their
representatives in the United States
moreover the type of activity which is
most easy to detect and which may
indicate possible espionage does not
always satisfy the normal standard of
reasonable suspicion as a study prepared
by the fund for the Republic stated
twenty years ago
quote the problems of crime detection
and combating espionage are not ordinary
ones espionage is a crime which succeeds
only by secrecy
moreover spies work not for themselves
or privately organized crime syndicates
but as agents of national States their
activities are therefore likely to be
carefully planned highly organized and
carried on by techniques skillfully
designed to prevent detection end quote
consequently espionage investigations
must be initiated on the basis of
fragments of information especially
where there may be only an indication of
a suspicious contact with a foreign
agent and limited data as to the
specific purposes of the contact
in addition prosecution is frequently
not the objective of an espionage
investigation for one thing the
government may desire to avoid exposing
its own counter espionage practices and
information in addition the purpose of
the investigation may be to find out
what a known foreign agent is looking
for both as an indication of the
espionage interest of the foreign
country and as a means of ensuring that
the agent is not on the track of vital
information since foreign agents are
replaceable it may be a better defense
not to expel them from the country or
otherwise halt their activities but
rather to maintain a constant watch on
their operations
this also means investigating in a more
limited fashion
many of the Americans with whom the
foreign agent associates in order to
determine what the agent may be
interested in learning from them in the
1930s and 1940s another argument for
going beyond the criminal statutes was
that there were significant ideological
and Nationality factors which motivated
persons to engage in espionage as
Attorney General Jackson put it in 1940
individuals were a likely source of law
violation because they were sympathetic
with the systems or designs of foreign
dictators the 1946 report of the
Canadian royal Commission made similar
findings this was the most persuasive
rationale for continuing FBI
intelligence investigations of
Communists and fascists as well as
German and other nationality groups
before World War two it continued to be
a substantial basis for such
investigations of communists after the
war footnote a characteristic of most of
the cases in which espionage for the
Soviet Union has been prosecuted is that
the participants seem to have been
motivated by ideology fund for the
Republic digest of the public record of
communism in the United States page 29
and footnote by the mid-50s however the
characteristics of foreign espionage had
changed substantially the decline of the
Communist Party caused a shrinkage in
possible recruits with the result that
Soviet intelligence reverted more and
more to the old type of conventional spy
a report prepared by the association of
the bar of the city of New York observed
that it was vital to adjust the
government's security programs to new
conditions one of which was the decline
of the appeal of communism the report
added quote in the 1930s and 1940s the
Soviet Union could rely on the support
of a small but substantial group in this
country who were sympathetic with its
asserted aims now this has largely
changed this has made a radical change
in the type and a number of persons who
might be lured into communist espionage
end quote
the FBI itself believed that the
Communist Party had become a potential
rather than an actual espionage danger
while that potential threat was still
significant in view of the party's
subservience to the Soviet Union the
counter espionage justification for
sweeping investigations of persons one
or two steps removed from the party
eg sympathizers or infiltrated groups
lost much of its force nevertheless
there continued to be hostile foreign
intelligence activities which the FBI
characterizes as efforts to penetrate
the American political system or attempt
to develop an agent of influence in
American politics or efforts to
influence the u.s. policymaking
structure therefore the monitoring of
contacts between US government officials
and foreign officials who are likely to
be carrying out the directions of a
hostile foreign intelligence service is
a necessary part of the FBI's
investigative duties the subject of
investigation is the foreign official
and any inquiry directed towards the
American official can be limited to
determining the nature of the foreign
officials interests frequently it is
desirable that the American official be
informed by the Bureau especially when
the contact is overt rather than furtive
or clandestine the same is also true
with respect to overt contacts with
American private citizens there are two
areas of special difficulty in
prescribing the FBI's proper
responsibility the first involves
contacts between members of Congress or
high-level executive officials and
equally high-level foreign officials
there have been instances where the FBI
has had reason to believe that such
contacts might involve the unauthorized
disclosure of confidential information
to a foreign government except in such
rare circumstances however contacts of
this nature need not be the subject of
FBI investigation or dissemination the
second difficulty involves the concept
foreign subversion used most recently in
President Ford's executive order
defining the counterintelligence duties
of the US intelligence community
including the FBI as noted above the
bureau characterizes certain hostile
foreign intelligence activities as
attempts to develop agents of influence
in American politics
the FBI considered one of dr. Martin
Luther King's advisors to be such an
agent of influence in this case as with
the massive investigations to uncover
possible foreign influence on domestic
protest activities the concern for
foreign subversion was distorted so far
beyond a reasonable definition that the
term subversion should be abandoned
completely even with the qualifier
foreign the concept is so elastic as to
be susceptible to future misuse
nevertheless there remains a compelling
need to investigate all the activities
of hostile foreign intelligence services
including their efforts to recruit
agents of influence this can be
accomplished by continuing investigation
of the foreign agents themselves where a
foreign agent makes an overt contact
with an American a limited inquiry
regarding the American is appropriate to
determine the nature of the foreign
agents interests this applies whether
the agents interest is information or
influence and the bureau can frequently
make its inquiry known to the American
but the bureau's objectives should be
confined solely to learning more about
the overall mission of the hostile
service and the particular assignments
of its officers as opposed to
investigating influenced by foreign
officials or agents who do not have
intelligence duties and the lawful
activities of Americans who are not
foreign agents there is no compelling
reason for intensive investigations of
US officials or private citizens simply
because they are targets of foreign
influence the line must be tightly drawn
so that FBI counterintelligence
investigations do not themselves once
again intrude into the American
political process with consequences
damaging not only to the rights of
Americans but also to public confidence
in the bureau citizen cooperation with
the FBI is essential to its success in
detecting and countering the threat of
hostile foreign intelligence operations
to the defense of the nation to achieve
this end the federal criminal statutes
dealing with espionage should be
substantially revised to take account of
the contemporary counterintelligence
responsibilities of the FBI a realistic
definition of foreign directed
clandestine intelligence activity would
make it possible for the FBI to base its
counterintelligence investigations on
the firm foundation of the criminal law
rather than the shifting interpretations
of terms like subversion in executive
orders the committee agrees with
attorney general Edward H Levi that
quote the fact that the FBI has criminal
investigative responsibilities which
must be conducted within the confines of
constitutional protections strictly
enforced by the courts gives the
organization an awareness of the
interests of individual liberties that
might be missing in an agency devoted
solely to intelligence work end quote
section 9
Part C conclusions one a subcommittee on
counterintelligence should be
established within the framework of the
National Security Council
NSC its purpose would be to monitor CI
activities authorized important counter
espionage operations and adjudicate
interagency disagreements over CI
policies coordination defector bona
fides suspected hostile penetrations and
related matters to the President of the
United States in consultation with the
oversight Committees of Congress should
undertake a top-secret review of current
issues in the realm of
counterintelligence this review which
should form the basis for an internal
presidential statement on national
counterintelligence policy and
objectives should include close
attention to the following issues
compartment ation operations security
research accountability training
internal review deception liaison and
coordination and manpower three
congressional oversight
devote more attention to this area to
help preserve the liberties of American
citizens and to prod the intelligence
community toward a more effective
defense of the nation additional
recommendations on counterintelligence
including reform of the Espionage laws
and legislation setting standards for
the activities affecting the rights of
Americans are made in the committee's
report on intelligence activities and
the rights of Americans